Add Windows packaging requirements RFC document (#3973)
ROCm/TheRock: docs/rfcs/RFC0011-Windows-Packaging-Requirements.md

- **Python pip packages** for Python bindings, Python-first tooling, and environment-scoped developer workflows
- **ZIP archives** for portable, offline, CI, ir power-user scenarios

MSI packages are the authoritative Windows installation unit. Winget, pip, and ZIP deliverables must complement MSI behavior rather than redefine the core packaging contract.

### Directory Layout

The ROCm Core SDK on Windows must be installed under a versioned installation root to support side-by-side installation of major.minor releases.

```
C:\rocm\core-X.Y
```

Where:

- `X.Y` is the major and minor version
- Patch versions must be installed in place within the existing `X.Y` directory
- Side-by-side installation is supported for different major.minor versions
- Patch-only side-by-side installation is not supported

The installed directory structure must mirror the cross-platform ROCm layout as closely as practical:

```
C:\rocm\core-X.Y\
  bin\
  lib\
  include\
  share\
  tools\
  version.txt
```

A convenience path to the most recently installed version should be maintained when practical:

```

> C:\rocm\core  ->  C:\rocm\core-8.2

Author: Symlinks require admin privileges or enablement of Windows developer mode. It's now stated in RFC that this is purely a convenience feature and not required for use.

C:\rocm\core-8  ->  C:\rocm\core-8.2
```

This allows users, scripts, and build systems to either target and latest installed release or pin to a major line while still preserving independently versioned install roots.

### DLL Search Order and Runtime Discovery

Windows packages must avoid reliance on `C:\Windows\System32` for ROCm runtime discovery.

All new Windows ROCm runtime components must be installed into the package installation root, primarily under `bin`, and discovered through one or more of the following supported mechanisms:

- Application-local deployment for redistributable scenarios
- `PATH` entries associated with the selected ROCm installation
- Registry-based SDK discovery
- Environment-variable-based SDK discovery

> 

Reviewer: Separate ROCM_PATH to current version? Or C:\ROCM, the root installation direction 
Or ROCM_PATH is the default latest version of ROCM?

Author: Do we need to provide a ROCM_ROOT variable, the folder where multiple versions of ROCm are installed to?

New installations must not place core ROCm runtime DLLs into `System32`. Legacy driver-installed runtime DLLs in `System32` that conflict with the new Windows packaging model must be detected and handled by the appropriate runtime installer. At a minimum, the Windows runtime package must handle cleanup of legacy `amdhip64` and `amd_comgr` placements when present, while preserving installer robustness if files are locked or permissions are insufficient.

### Package Naming

Windows package naming should remain aligned with the Linux TheRock naming model where practical so that users can reason about package purpose consistently across operating systems.

The `amdrocm-` naming prefix should be used for AMD-published Windows package componens where a package-level identity is exposed directly to users.

Examples inlcude:

> 

Author: Table defined and Linux RFC has been linked

- `amdrocm-runtimes`

> - `amdrocm-core`

Author: I think it's better if it's left outside of developer tools and just remains completely separate.

Major.minor releases must be installable side by side in distinct versioned roots.

### Upgrade and Uninstall Requirements

Windows packages must provide predictable and clean upgrade and uninstall behavior.

Upgrade requirements:

- In-place upgrades must preserve the expected installation root for the target `X.Y` line
- Upgrade flows must avoid overwriting unrelated user environment settings
- Upgrade flows must not leave stale package-owned files in shared locations when the package manager can safely remove them
- Package upgrade behavior must remain consistent whether invoked directly through MSI or through winget

Uninstall requirements:

- Remove files owned by the installation being removed
- Remove environment-variable updates owned by that installation if they still reference that installation
- Remove registry entries created by that installation
- Remove package-owend  `PATH` entries associated with that installation only
- Avoid impacting other installed ROCm major.minor versions

### Environment Variables

After successful installation, Windows installers must publish a stable discovery mechanism for tools and build systems.

At minimum:

> - `ROCM_PATH` must point to the installation root of the most recently installed active ROCm version

Author: Specified latest installed version instead of most recently installed version to clarify

---
author: Liam Berry (LiamfBerry), Saad Rahim (saadrahim)
created: 2026-03-13
modified: 2026-03-30
status: draft
---

# TheRock Windows Packaging Requirements

With the implementation of TheRock build system, native Windows packaging and installation requirements must be defined to complement the Linux software packaging requirements. This RFC defines the packaging, installation, upgrade, uninstallation, versioning, and distribution requirements for TheRock software on native Windows, including the ROCm Core SDK and related ROCm software components.

Our goals are to:

1. **Standardize packaging behaviour for native Windows ROCm software**
1. **Ensure predictable installation, upgrade, repair, side-by-side support, and uninstall behavior**
1. **Provide redistributable-friendly Windows delivery mechanisms for developers, IT administrators, and ISVs**
1. **Align Windows packaging structure with the broader TheRock cross-platform packaging model where practical**
1. **Support automated artifact generation and productized deliverables from TheRock**

## Scope

### In Scope

> 

Reviewer 2: It would be great if the rock installer will support flexible headless/cmd installation. Imagine some build machines that doesn't have any amdgpus, but still are used for building HIP/ROCm apps. With the current HIPSDK it is not very straight forward.

Reviewer 2: In addidtion please give the user options from the termina what components to install. Not all are required all the time. Most often it is just HIP API, runtime, compiler etc. without any other rocm libraries (fft, blas, sparse, etc)

All new Windows ROCm runtime components must be installed into the package installation root, primarily under `bin`, and discovered through one or more of the following supported mechanisms:

- Application-local deployment for redistributable scenarios
- `PATH` entries associated with the selected ROCm installation
- Registry-based SDK discovery
- Environment-variable-based SDK discovery
- `ROCM_PATH` environment variable must point to the latest ROCm release

New installations must not place core ROCm runtime DLLs into `System32`. Legacy driver-installed runtime DLLs in `System32` that conflict with the new Windows packaging model must be detected and handled by the appropriate runtime installer. At a minimum, the Windows runtime package must handle cleanup of legacy `amdhip64` and `amd_comgr` placements when present, while preserving installer robustness if files are locked or permissions are insufficient.

### OpenCL Changes

OpenCL will laregely in part be sustained and no changes are expected to be implemented. Installing, upgrading, or uninstalling the ROCm SDK must have no effect on an OpenCL environment.

> Additionally, `amd_comgr_3.dll` will be renamed to `amd_comgr_opencl.dll` to better reflect its usecase and so that it can be shipped alongside the driver.

Author: ```suggestion
Additionally, `amd_comgr_3.dll` will be renamed to `amd_comgr_opencl.dll` to better reflect its use case and so that it can be shipped alongside the driver version 26.30 in Q3.
```

1. **The OS enabled the long paths option**: Computer Configuration -> Administrative Templates -> System -> Filesystem -> Enable Win32 long paths.
1. **The program** must include the <longPathAware>true</longPathAware> XML tag.

The enablement of long paths is required for registry key names involving the SDK files. This includes Cmake, headers, etc. and excludes the runtimes. All redistributable runtimes will support the default `MAX_PATH` length of 260 characters.

The installer should have an option to enable:

```
HKLM\SYSTEM\CurrentControlSet\Control\FileSystem
LongPathsEnabled = 1
```

The redistributable installers include:

| File name                   | Friendly name                            |
| :-------------------------- | :--------------------------------------- |
| amdrocm-runtimes.msi        | ROCm Runtime Redistributable             |
| amdrocm-core.msi            | ROCm Core Runtime Redistributable        |
| amdrocm-developer-tools.msi | ROCm Core Developer Tools                |
| amdrocm-core-sdk.msi        | ROCm Core SDK Redistributable            |
| amdrocm-raytracing.msi      | ROCm Ray Tracing Runtime Redistributable |

> | amdrocm-raytracing-sdk.msi  | ROCm Ray Tracing SDK                     |

Reviewer 3: Mapping to the Linux packaging requirements, these are roughly 1:1 with the "meta packages" here: https://github.com/ROCm/TheRock/blob/main/docs/rfcs/RFC0009-OS-Packaging-Requirements.md#meta-packages right?

Would we also want the finer grained packages like `amdrocm-llvm`: https://github.com/ROCm/TheRock/blob/main/docs/rfcs/RFC0009-OS-Packaging-Requirements.md#package-granularity ? I didn't comment much on that during the Linux packaging work, but I'm wondering how much of that fine granularity is actually needed - it's a _lot_ of code to support and potentially debug: https://github.com/ROCm/TheRock/blob/main/build_tools/packaging/linux/package.json. If we don't need that on Windows, why do we need it on Linux?

Winget package identifiers may use Windows ecosystem naming conventions such as `AMD.ROCm`, but they should map cleanly to the same product and component boundaries.

### Installer for ROCm on Windows

Windows package granularity should follow the same general model as Linux: runtime and development responsibilities must be seperable, and developer tools must be independently installable.

The following high-level package groupings must be avaialable:

| File Name                     | Content                                                                                            | Description                       |
| :---------------------------- | :------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- | :-------------------------------- |
| `amdrocm-runtimes.msi`        | HIP runtime, runtime compiler support, required runtime libraries                                  |  Run pre-built ROCm projects      |
| `amdrocm-core.msi`            | Runtime components, core libraries, core utilities, discovery tools                                |  Run ROCm projects                |

> | `amdrocm-core-dev.msi`        | Headers, CMake config files, import libraries, static libraries, compiler-facing development files | Build ROCm projects               |

Reviewer 3: Just something to consider...

How much do we really need headers, CMake files, etc. "installable", given that we have an open source build system now? At a certain level I could see the instructions for developers changing to "checkout this release branch of TheRock / rocm-libraries / etc." instead of "run this installer".

Reviewer 4: It has to work with their build systems.  Checking about a branch isn't the usual way to do this.  Also, some systems are air-gapped.

- Be digitally signed by AMD
- Avoid partially installed states and maintain transactional integrity to the degree supported by Windows Installer

Example installation commands:

```
msiexec /i amdrocm-core-sdk.msi /quiet
msiexec /i amdrocm-core-sdk.msi INSTALLDIR="D:\tools\rocm\core-8.2" /quiet
msiexec /x amdrocm-core-sdk.msi /quiet
msiexec /famus amdrocm-core-sdk.msi /quiet
```

MSI installers should be GUI-less or minimal-UI by default and must support unattended enterprise deployment.

### Device-Specific Architecture Packages

Users are encouraged to identify their local GPU architecture and install packages exclusive to the GPU architectures present. Otherwise, users can install a complete ROCm installation with all GPU architectures to enable all GPUs. 

The following two installer options will be available:

1. **General Installer**: Install packages for all supported architectures.
1. **Architecture Specific Installer**: Install packages for a specific GPU architecture family (e.g., gfx-110x)

All device-specific packages must:

- Not conflict with each other
- Be independently installable
- Support meta-packages

> 

Author: Use cases added

- Upgrade flows must not leave stale package-owned files in shared locations when the package manager can safely remove them
- Package upgrade behavior must remain consistent whether invoked directly through MSI or through winget

Uninstall requirements:

- Remove files owned by the installation being removed
- Remove environment-variable updates owned by that installation if they still reference that installation
- Remove registry entries created by that installation
- Remove package-owend  `PATH` entries associated with that installation only
- Avoid impacting other installed ROCm major.minor versions

### Environment Variables

After successful installation, Windows installers must publish a stable discovery mechanism for tools and build systems.

At minimum:

- `ROCM_PATH` must point to the installation root of the latest installed and active ROCm version
- The selected installation's `bin` directory must be prepended to the relevant `PATH`
- Duplicate `PATH` entries must not be introduced across reinstalls or upgrades
- Per-machine installs must modify machine-scoped enrionment variables
- Per-user installs must modify user-scoped environment variables only

> The convenience variable `ROCM_PATH` is last-writer-wins. Build systems and applications that require deterministic selection of a specific version should rely on versioned install paths and registry-based discovery rather than assuming `ROCM_PATH` is pinned permanently.

Author: Added requirements to address this

New installations must not place core ROCm runtime DLLs into `System32`. Legacy driver-installed runtime DLLs in `System32` that conflict with the new Windows packaging model must be detected and handled by the appropriate runtime installer. At a minimum, the Windows runtime package must handle cleanup of legacy `amdhip64` and `amd_comgr` placements when present, while preserving installer robustness if files are locked or permissions are insufficient.

### OpenCL Changes

OpenCL will laregely in part be sustained and no changes are expected to be implemented. Installing, upgrading, or uninstalling the ROCm SDK must have no effect on an OpenCL environment.

> Additionally, `amd_comgr_2.dll` will be renamed to `amd_comgr_opencl.dll` to better reflect its usecase and so that it can be shipped alongside the driver.

Reviewer 5: amd_comgr_2 -> amd_comgr_3

Author: ```suggestion
Additionally, `amd_comgr_3.dll` will be renamed to `amd_comgr_opencl.dll` to better reflect its usecase and so that it can be shipped alongside the driver.
```
